
# Choice of translation framework in the frontend

---
<!-- These are optional elements. Feel free to remove any of them. -->

- status: accepted
- date: 05.09.2022
- deciders: Ole Schwiegert
- consulted: Johannes Keiser
- informed: UCS@school team

---

## Context and Problem Statement

We need to translate the native english texts in the frontend to different languages and be able to offer end users
the choice of which language to use. For that we need to implement these capabilities in the frontend.

Not only is it important to be able to translate texts of the ui modules, but we also need to be able to create and use
translations for the univention-veb component library.

## Decision Drivers

<!-- This is an optional element. Feel free to remove. -->

- Ease of use
- Powerful options/flexibility down the line

## Considered Options

- self written solution
- [vue-i18n](https://vue-i18n.intlify.dev/)
- [nexti18n](https://www.i18next.com/)
- [gettext](https://github.com/jshmrtn/vue3-gettext)

## Decision Outcome

We chose the option *nexti18n*, because it is a javascript translation framework that is applicable to a wide range
of ui frameworks, like Vue, React and many more. It is also easy to learn and use and offers an integration for Vue.

With nexti18n we get access to a host of options on how the frontend accesses and caches the translations down the line,
if we need better performance or user made translations.

### Positive Consequences

- The framework is easy to use and learn
- It's popularity might help new coworkers adapting to it easier
- It is stable and not bound to a specific frontend framework

### Negative Consequences

- For Univention it is a new library. We cannot just use the processes already implemented for the portal/self-service
- It is not as tightly integrated with Vue as the first party vue-i18n library. We use some comfort with Vue devtools

## More Information

The decision for nexti18n instead of gettext was strongly influenced by the decision to use the project and 'green field'
for trying out something new. We want to explore other possibilities for i18n and learn from the experience. In this limited
scope it will be easy enough to replace it down the line, if necessary.
